[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, if I had
said to you a few years ago that there's
a bank and the bank is taking deposits,
you know, checking accounts, and it's
putting that money into US treasuries
and that business model is going to
completely fail, the bank is going to
collapse. What would you have said?
>> Uh, I would have said, "Let's short the
stock." That's what I would have said. I
said if you told me that and you knew
the only insight the only actionable
thing there I said all right let's short
it
>> all right that's the right answer
clearly if you were a banking regulator
what would you have done
>> well
I don't know anything about being a
banking regular it seems really hard and
regulators in general often get
criticized in various ways
>> and they're like oh you busted this
really small time ticky tech etc trading
ring it's not that big of a deal or oh
here's this uh thing that collapsed and
why didn't you catch it before? They're
always going to get upset about that.
But I have to say I have a lot of
sympathy for the regulators because for
the most part my impression is that the
US has one of the most robust,
transparent, high-epth capital markets
and financial systems in the entire
world, which for the most part does not
collapse. And so I feel like when it
comes to regulatory issues, there's a
lot of unseen where what we see is like
if they're in the news, it's not good.
But most of the time things aren't in
the news. That should be the tagline for
America's uh financial system. Most of
the time does not collapse.
>> Yeah.
>> All right.
>> Unironically.
>> Well, I'm talking of course or I was
talking about Silicon Valley Bank and
the collapse there. And I think it's
still very surprising to me. In in one
sense, it was an old-fashioned bank run,
but in another sense, it's very
surprising that here's a bank that's
basically buying a bunch of ultra safe
assets, US treasuries, and still it ran
into trouble. And banks of course are
mandated to buy treasuries as well.
We've talked about this on the show any
number of times now. But
>> I want to talk more about it.
>> Sure. You know, the one thing I'll say
too that I've been thinking a lot with
SVB is I think in the wake of the 2008
2009 financial crisis, we got very
focused on the asset side of the balance
sheet, right? And so it's like, oh, what
do they have? What kind of subprime
loans do they have and how good are
their all of that, etc. But one of the
things, you know, like Josh Younger
talked about recently and others,
Stephen Kelly had a note in our
newsletter, you know, a lot of it is the
difficulty in modeling the liability
side and the slipperiness of the deposit
base and how hard that is to know
because you can have long duration
deposits that suddenly become overnight
deposits. It's really tricky and I still
think these are difficult things to
understand.
>> Yeah, it feels like we're always
fighting the last bank battle or the
last bond battle. Okay. Well, on that
note, we do in fact have the perfect
guest. We are going to be speaking with
Roit Chopra. He is, of course, the
former director of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, also a
former FTC commissioner, so really the
perfect person to talk to if we want to
dig into what happened to SVB, what it
means for bank regulation, and then also
what banks are doing right now. Yeah,
>> Roit, thank you so much for coming on a
thoughts.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> Here's my first question. Maybe it's a
little pointed, but does the CFPB still
exist? So, we just got the one big
beautiful bill that's been passed and it
looks like it slashes funding for the
bureau. And of course, we know that
Trump isn't exactly a fan of federal
agencies. So, I'm curious, is it still
functioning?
>> It was already kind of gutted.
>> Yeah. Anyway,
>> yeah, it's a good question. And it seems
by every single piece of evidence that
it's just maybe there technically, but
not doing a damn thing. We are hearing
nearly every day about another financial
institution that is being released from
obligations.
>> It has been months since there has been
an enforcement action and many are
estimating that this means billions and
billions of dollars that consumers are
not getting back in refunds and frankly
a big disadvantage to all of those
financial companies that follow the
rules. when it was working when it or
when it was operating. Describe to me
what the remmit of the CFPB is and one
of the criticisms of the that people
leveled is they didn't know what the
scope was etc. What is the formal scope
of the CFPB?
>> Well, essentially we saw decades ago
that there weren't just banks in the
business of offering consumer loans and
products. It was all sorts of other
companies, payday lenders, auto lenders,
and in fact now the bulk of mortgages
are originated outside of banks, the
bulk of auto loans. And so after the
subprime mortgage crisis, there was
broad agreement that the Federal Reserve
Board and other agencies just didn't
focus and have the attention on making
sure that existing consumer law
>> was being followed. So the CFPB is
responsible for inspecting the largest
financial institutions and taking them
to court when they break the law. Of
course, also administering all sorts of
rules that keep the mortgage markets,
the credit report, credit reporting
companies, and so many others in line.
>> How does the CFPB interact with all the
other bank policy stakeholders? Because
there there seems to be quite a few. You
mean the other regulators?
>> Well, certainly the CFPB is the only
>> regulator that oversees that gigantic
non-bank consumer lending apparatus
>> and also it has primary and exclusive
jurisdiction over all banks and credit
unions over 10 billion in assets. That
means every credit card company, every
big player in the market is primarily
overseen by the CFPB. So the fact that
it is now functionally a dead fish is
leaving a very very big gap that no one
can even legally fill in.
>> Where do you see the biggest gap
manifesting right now when you look at
the consumer financial landscape? What
isn't being enforced or what isn't being
examined that in your view merits
enforcement or examination? Well, I
think the top priority is always trying
to understand the linkage between the
biggest markets and the broader economy.
We saw that that linkage with the
mortgage market was pretty damn big and
its failure really crashed not just the
US financial system but the entire
global marketplace. So, of course,
making sure that mortgages are fair and
transparent, that key rules like the
qualified mortgage rule, which sets some
of the core standards to make sure there
is not predatory mortgage lending, but
also Joe, the nuts and bolts. Most of
the issues that come in are people who
have errors on their credit report. They
say, "That's not even my name." or
people whose bank accounts were
illegally debited or cleaned out due to
fraud. There's all sorts of issues that
protect specific populations,
military members, and so many other
pieces that keep the markets working.
So, I don't want to pinpoint anything
other than to say that when I took
office, it was after another few years
where there really wasn't much going on
there. And we saw how financial firms
not just pushed the envelope but
sometimes outright took advantage of
people without any accountability.
>> Well, speaking of accountability, you
know, we mentioned SVB at the top of the
show, and one thing I've heard, there's
a little bit of a chicken and egg
situation when people are analyzing the
root cause of that particular bank
collapse. So some people say, well,
interest rates went up and that led to
paper losses on the bank's bond
holdings, and so people got nervous and
started pulling their money. And then
other people say, well, people started
pulling their money even though the bond
losses didn't necessarily need to be
crystallized anytime soon. So I'm
curious, can you pinpoint the spark that
set off the latest bank crisis? Well,
for me it really was March 8th
>> 2023.
Two things happened that day. One was
the windown of a bank called Silvergate
Bank which was heavily involved in
banking some of the major crypto trading
platforms. There was a flight of
deposits out of that bank after the
crypto winter and the collapse of FTX.
We had been tracking I serve on the FDIC
board and we were tracking Silvergate
Bank and on that day they announced that
they were not going to need to be put
into receiverhip. they would be
self-liquidating.
And simultaneously on that same day, we
had an announcement by Silicon Valley
Bank, which is a little bit of a goofy
press release they issued, saying
they're experiencing some real losses on
their securities portfolio and they're
going to be looking for capital. It
raised a lot of red flags and suspicions
about whether they were viable. And this
is something that is just so fundamental
about banking and deposit taking is that
it really is based on a belief that your
money is going to be there.
>> And the truth is is with federal deposit
insurance and Federal Reserve discount
window lending, it always is. Except
when you have a bank that is over 90%
uninsured deposits. This is something
that is really unusual and some would
argue is not even really a bank
>> when you are that dependent on very very
large depositors that you grew so
quickly
>> and so then the run began. How much
would you ascribe it to the high
percentage of non-insured deposits
versus the concentration? So, in very
specific industries. So, you mentioned
the crypto one, but also here were all
of these startups that had raised a ton
of money in 2020 and 2021. A bunch of
them apparently just put their money in
a bank, which is kind of weird to me,
and uninsured. And then we had the stock
market plunge in 2022. Funding dried up.
There was no very little new VC
fundraising. So new dry powder to be put
into the bank. Startups drawing down
their own deposits just to make payroll
or whatever else. And so you have two
things going on. One is the high level
of uninsured deposits, but also the
concentration. So that there was this
one specific sector that was all going
through the cycle at the same time. So
let me just push on that because even
though it is one sector and I agree with
you the concentration
>> was an important factor in this but
let's remember that the individual firms
that were funded by venture capital many
of them were doing fine. Um there was
not necessarily something specifically
or systemically wrong with those
businesses. But I think and I agree with
every small and midsize business out
there. If I am launching a startup,
whether it is an AI company or a dry
cleaner,
it doesn't rank in the top 20 reasons of
my business failing that my bank is
going to fail.
>> Sure. And so what you start hearing is
that these businesses which are highly
networked as well as much faster
communication, you get the advice from
your funders and others that you need to
run.
>> And it was very clear that it was not
just happening at SVB, it then was
happening all over the system. I was on
a train to Connecticut around that time
and someone was sitting kind of close to
me and it turned out they were banking
with SVB. Their company was and I could
hear the panic in their voice as they
tried to like digest the news of what
was happening. But on that note, why did
corporate treasurers why did they put
all their deposits in a single bank when
presumably they know that there's a cap
on FDIC insurance?
>> Yeah, it it's a good question. I think
there are some practical issues for some
small and midsize businesses about when
you're running payroll or when you're
getting in a lot of receipts. I don't
have as much sympathy for some of the
very large companies that we have
learned through public reporting
>> put a whole lot of funds in that bank
including really their entire cash
reserves. So at the end of the day
though the regulators we had we saw an
active run that was occurring and of
course those insured depositors the
insured depositors really through the
entire crisis did not really run. It was
those uninsured
it beca it started at Silicon Valley
Bank after that Wednesday release by
Friday morning they were dead. We had
actually voted the night before or maybe
at the pre-dawn hours to accept it into
receiverhip and I believe by the time it
was closed it had roughly $und00 billion
queued up of outbound wires. So this was
an enormous and fast run. And many of
those technol libertarians that we often
hear about who want no regulation, they
were actively beating the drum online
asking
>> for a bailout.
>> Well, this is actually interesting point
and I was going to go there next and I
think again it was a thing that Stephen
Kelly wrote for us, but one of the
things about 2023 I think he said it
wasn't a crisis of regional banks. It
was a regional bank crisis as in
specifically the region of California
because then there were other parts of
there were other banks that got into a
lot of trouble and the all thing they
had in common was that they were all
sort of in some way connected to
California. I think I remember like
people were going out looking for any
bank that had California in the title in
some way and betting against them. But
talk to us about regulating banks and
monitoring runs in a world of these
networks, whether they're the public
networks on social media or just the
sort of networks of like-minded
individuals who are all in the same
WhatsApp group.
>> Yeah, I'm a believer that we can never
fight and we shouldn't want to fight the
speed of communication. We want markets
to have live information. I will say
this, we saw the run start first at
Silicon Valley Bank and then I think
because of the confluence of factors
with Silvergate, it wasn't just
California is anything that seemed to
have any crypto or tech adjacency. Of
course, the second bank that we closed
that Sunday was Signature Bank, which
operated a crypto network, but also had
a very real business. It is a New York
City bank that was deeply involved in
New York City multifamily real estate.
You at the same time Joe had people
worried about commercial real estate.
>> But what we were seeing was that the
banks with the highest percentage of
uninsured deposits,
>> they were being badly battered almost
immediately.
[Music]
So ultimately a decision was made to
expand the deposit insurance net and
basically bail out SVB customers and
others.
What was the decision-making process
like building up to that? And how big a
deal is that? Is there like a legacy
from that decision?
>> It's a very big deal and it's one that
in many ways is still hard to live with
the decision even though it was the
right decision. I think
>> here's how it works. The federal law
basically directs the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, the FDIC, to
resolve a failed bank at the least cost
to the deposit insurance fund. That's
the fund that everyone pays into with
their bank deposits. And it builds up a
fund to pay for certain bank failures
and make sure deposits are made whole.
And here's what was interesting about
Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank
and then later First Republic. It was a
super majority of uninsured deposits.
That means a bank failure is not that
expensive to resolve. the cost to the
deposit insurance fund for a bank that
is 90% plus uninsured is going to be
pretty low. And if the law says resolve
it at the least cost, in many ways the
best case is sometimes to liquidate it,
make as many people whole as possible
and top them up with the deposit
insurance fund. But there is a proviso
in the law which says that if a failure
is likely to lead to systemic effects or
to threaten the viability of the US
financial system. There's a process of
key turning that a series of regulators
must go through to recommend to the
Treasury Secretary who must consult with
the president to authorize the FDIC to
take a different path. So over the
weekend, the Sunday after the failure of
Silicon Valley Bank and Sunday morning
roughly, Signature Bank was taken into
receiverhip.
First Republic was a zombie and
basically dead already.
>> Oh yeah.
>> There was a decision where the FDIC
board, we voted
to turn that key and the Federal Reserve
Board had voted to turn that key and
ultimately the Treasury Secretary
discussed it with the president and
activated that authority. The authority
essentially led to the backstopping of
all uninsured deposits.
>> That meant that everyone would be made
whole in the case of the failure and it
was a tough decision. I think there was
a question.
I was arguing and questioning should we
be maybe raising the limit dramatically
perhaps to 25 or $50 million. What we
were seeing in the system was active
movement of uninsured deposits
everywhere.
And ultimately the decision to invoke
that exception really did calm the
system for the most part with the big
exception of First Republic Bank.
>> So the other thing that happened other
than the expanded deposit insurance was
the creation of a new Fed lending
facility. Another acronym, the BTFP. How
big a deal was that one?
>> That one was weird. All banks have the
ability to access the discount window
through the Federal Reserve,
>> right?
>> But the Federal Reserve used some
bailout authorities to launch this bank
term funding program. This allowed banks
to pledge their Treasury securities at
par and draw
>> draw funds from the Federal Reserve. I
think there were a lot of us who raised
our eyebrows at this. If the banks
already had access to the discount
window, why did they need this special
program? I worried about the precedent
setting of this. It was justified on the
basis that there is stigma of going to
the discount window. Ultimately, we saw
some financial institutions game and
arbitrage the program by drawing on it
but then earning interest on reserves. I
think we just have to be really careful
when the Fed engages in lots of bailout
programs because it sends a signal to
the market that they can expect it the
next time around. as a regulator and
there are many people who say this and I
you had a high level of scrutiny towards
companies that banked crypto companies
and many of them claimed that they were
treated unfairly. What is it just from a
high level? Let's start there. From a
high level, what issues emerge when if
any issues emerge from a bank that tries
to build up a business among crypto
companies?
>> I think this is a bit of a conspiracy
theory.
>> Yeah. No, look, I'm but I'm just from a
regulatory pers. Okay, go on. Because
the truth is is that the issues with
Silicon Valley Bank as you know and and
described earlier was really about being
so deeply underwater on their treasury
securities.
>> But there's whether we're talking about
Signature Bank which did have a pretty
big crypto book but also you just get
all these crypto companies like oh we
don't have it's so difficult for us to
find a bank account. Is it difficult for
them to do banking?
>> Yeah. So let's see what we mean about
banking for for crypto lending.
>> Certainly there are going to be some
banks who feel they have no expertise in
this. I think the really interesting
question is about deposit taking.
>> Yes, definitely. I'm not talking about
crypto. I'm talking about the deposit
taking from cryptonative or crypto
companies. deposit taking. There are a
set of issues that banks always are
going to want to look at when it comes
to taking very very large deposits with
a lot of in-n-out activity. And much of
that is related to their own obligations
for money laundering as well as what was
mentioned before deposit concentration.
So when you are a bank that has a couple
of depositors who are the super majority
of your deposit base, you are obviously
going to take some steps to be careful
around that. And I would say that the
crypto issues in this run were fairly
muted. It was really the perception
about the potential exposures that we
saw through the market. Though I feel
that within a few days the fixation
again was on uninsured deposits.
>> When it comes to the bond losses, it
strikes me that the Fed is kind of in a
difficult position because on the one
hand it has to conduct monetary policy.
If inflation is high, it has to raise
benchmark rates. But on the other hand,
it also has a financial stability
mandate. It's not part of the dual
mandate, but it is a regulator. and
raising interest rates in this case
sparked a bank run it seems. How is the
Fed supposed to balance these two goals?
>> I don't see that as a balance at all.
Okay. I think there is a lot that the
Federal Reserve has really missed the in
in many of the situations involving
financial stability
around Lehman Brothers as well as even
including
COVID. But certainly this one was a more
clear linkage where when you have high
concentrations
of bond portfolios that are underwater,
you need to be extra careful to not make
sure that they are under capitalized,
that they lack liquidity, and frankly
that you are not turning a blind eye
when you are supervising that
institution. The warning signs with
Silicon Valley Bank were there for
months. And I do think there was a bit
of a culture at the Federal Reserve of
really taking a light touch in the years
leading up to the crisis that I think
has proven to be costly.
[Music]
I want to go back to crypto because I
want to talk not just I understand the
the obligations that a bank has in terms
of money laundering in terms of lots of
in-n-out transactions etc. However, from
a regulatory perspective were banks that
built up a crypto book of business did
they get extra scrutiny in some way or
did they does that merit extra scrutiny?
I think you always want to make sure
that rules are as clear as possible. And
I do think bank regulation has turned
into really a messy set of rules.
Frankly, I think to accommodate the
largest players rather than simple
bright line rules. with when it comes to
new types of activities,
>> there's no question that novel
activities are going to need a little
bit more look than say a straightforward
mortgage or a straightforward small
business loan. So when you have
particularly a bank that doesn't have
experience in a product that may pose
some real risks to them, I don't think
it's unreasonable for a bank regulator
to kick the tires.
>> What is kicking the tires look like
specifically?
>> I think it can take a wide range of
activities. It really depends on what
type of new business that that bank is
offering. But at the core making sure
that that bank is well capitalized and
liquid
>> is always the top priority. But of you
know banks play a major role in the
financial state craft of America and one
of the big reasons and benefits of the
reserve currency is the role in
detecting and deterring terrorism,
finance, drug cartels, and more. and
federal law puts some real obligations
on them for that.
>> Okay. So, speaking of novel businesses,
I want to widen the net a little bit and
maybe talk about fintech and what banks
are doing right now. And here I have to
issue a disclaimer which is I am very
jaded about fintech in general. I used
to cover it at the FT and I heard the
same stories, the same themes over and
over again like big tech is coming for
the banks or retail is coming for the
banks like Walmart start starting a
financial product and things like that.
Fast forward to today, I mean it does
seem like this is something that is
actually happening. What's the ultimate
ambition there in the payment space?
Well, payments is really something that
has so rapidly changed. Many of it is
very good. It's easier to move money,
particularly with mobile devices. It's
faster than it used to be. I do think
that we have some real concerns about
the playbook that many of the firms who
are moving money, how are they
monetizing it? A lot of our payments
companies and big tech companies I think
are really drooling over what they see
in China where Alip pay and WeChat pay
are trafficking almost all of the
consumer payments non-cash payments in
>> you can't pay in cash at a Starbucks in
Beijing. I know from personal experience
>> and we there's a lot of questions about
what is the monetization scheme there.
When I was at the CFPB, we led a study
that looked at all of these major
payment platforms. And I think there was
a desire to monetize a lot of that
payments information
through surveillance, being able to know
exactly not just the amount someone is
paying, but the skew level data in their
basket, ultimately feeding a
foundational algorithm that ultimately
could serve up personalized prices.
There was lots of issues we dealt with
when it comes to fraud and identity
theft. There were certainly issues when
it comes to the shift of where money was
being stored. Many people believed that
the app they were using to send money
had money in a bank account somewhere
but in fact maybe it was in an uninsured
account. So I think that we should be
looking at payments in terms of what is
the ambitions of those companies and why
do they want it. We worked hard with
global central banks and regulators to
inject more competition.
Apple for example had a real chokeold
over iOS devices only allowing Apple Pay
to be used. Europe has banned that
practice. other countries are looking to
restrict it as well. So I think that
stable coin and once stable coin becomes
part of the broader ecosystem which it
may it will open up some additional
issues about how payments in America
will ultimately work. Yeah, I was just
going to ask about that actually because
to some extent
that seems like a potentially good thing
if I'm worried about okay there's a
handful of internet giants and a handful
of commerce giants who want to have more
and more skew level data about myself
and what I buy to my mind it seems
possible that stable coins and having
your own distributed wallet on your
phone or something like that could
change the architecture of the internet
such that there isn't such a information
bottleneck that only a few giant
companies have access to.
>> Yeah, it depends on who's issuing them.
Okay. When I was at the Federal Trade
Commission, Mark Zuckerberg, Cheryl
Sandberg, others
>> announced the Libra project, which I
think was completely a way to cement
more of a moat of Facebook and and now
Meta's empire of being able to track and
trace the flow of money and ultimately
to be able to ensure that merchants
operating in their ecosystem would use
their currency of choice. So I think
it's really important that we do not
have payments and money controlled by
any real big commercial player. it is if
it if there is a stable coin that is
issued completely separately that is not
affiliated with one of those companies
but I worry that the market could easily
tip toward an existing big tech network
and ultimately that might provide huge
advantages to that firm but not
necessarily the whole economy. Tracy,
you know what's funny to me is, you
know, you have all the crypto people and
there a lot of them got really upset
about Libra again and how that thing
whole failed. But to my mind, if you
think about it, many of those same tech
people hated the speech regulations that
existed on the big social networks in
the early 2020s and the late 10s and the
idea of shadow banning and all of this
stuff. And it's like, imagine if they
did that to payments, right? Like do you
really want to invest that same power
that they have to decide what is
appropriate speech and not appropriate
speech into the realm of okay now they
also have the ability to regulate what
is appropriate payments and
inappropriate payments. That's a lot of
investature of power.
>> This is the issue that came up in the UK
right there was already some drama about
who was it Nigel Farage's bank account
being taken away because of his
politics. So yeah, that concern is
definitely there.
>> And we had that here where PayPal had
sent out some terms and conditions
that allowed PayPal to find people for
their speech presumably off platform.
And I think we need to be really careful
about giving any of those firms the
ability to really have a big footprint
either on speech or on commerce. And
that is part of the reason why most
developed countries have separated
banking and commerce. But we are now
potentially in a new era. And I would
argue stable coin is not really about
crypto. That might certainly be the
technology, but it is essentially a new
type of payments and banking charter.
>> Wait, talk more about that because most
people when they think of stable coins,
they probably think of a money market
fund, but as you point out, there's a
huge overlap with banking in the sense
that stable coin issuers are taking in
people's money and for the most part
supposedly putting it into things like
US treasuries, maybe gold, ultra safe
assets. And the whole business is built
on the premise that depositors are
always going to get their money back.
Right. That seems like an echo of a
bank.
>> That's right. And I think over time we
have seen how
the line has blurred between a bank and
other types of deposit instruments. You
know, essentially the Federal Reserve
has multiple times needed to stabilize
money market funds and in fact has a
facility at the New York Federal
Reserve, the overnight reverse repo
program that one could consider a sort
of daily bailout program to keep it
stable and transmit monetary policy. I
really worry that if we keep having
enormous flows from banks to these money
funds, we are essentially
going to create problems with how we
transmit and intermediate credit to the
real economy.
>> I would argue that a stable coin, if it
was a tokenized bank deposit
>> versus a tokenized money market fund,
has a lot of different effects long
term. Most of us know that banks are
still the key to lend to small
businesses, to lend to farms, and to
lend to the real economy. If you are
essentially putting a thumb on the scale
toward money market funds or tokenized
money market funds, the beneficiaries
are very large firms, sovereigns, and
others who can access those money
markets. So we should really want to
make sure that banks or there is some
something that takes the place of
filling in the gap for small businesses,
farmers and others who depend on bank
credit.
>> So the Senate in June passed the Genius
Act to, you know, start creating a more
robust set of stable coin regulations,
but it did not allow for yieldbearing
stable coins. So that's a great business
if you're in the stable coin business.
Collect all that yield, but you don't
have to pass it on unlike a bank. What's
your perspective on that? Is this about
preserving the importance of deposit
taking bank institutions so that they're
not dismediated into this way or is this
just a sop to the banks so that normal
old deposits are still a good business?
>> It's a very messy piece of legislation.
I think there is some arguments that
yield chasing of a uninsured product is
probably a recipe for more bailouts and
more mess. On the other hand, we can't
be setting federal laws to advantage
banks. Um, they often get what they want
anyway. I would argue that one of the
best ways to pursue some tokenized
payment systems that could potentially
disintermediate the incumbent payment
networks would be to use tokenized bank
deposits. And just like we could have
paper cash, each issued by a different
regional Federal Reserve Bank, our
digital wallets could host tokenized
bank deposits that are sitting in banks
across the country and being
intermediated into credit to the real
economy. I think what we see is largely
a legislative framework that is going to
benefit the big crypto incumbents. Well,
speaking of benefiting the big, another
largeish trend in the banking system is
consolidation, of course. And post the
financial crisis, I think we saw the
number of small banks, regional banks
out there absolutely plunge. And I think
it took a few years before we actually
got a new bank set up, a denovo bank.
And it was, I think, in Pennsylvania,
Amish country, which was kind of funny.
I guess my question is like presumably
you want a diverse network of lenders
out there because you want to avoid the
too big to fail problem and you want
people to have access to credit to your
point earlier. How do you encourage a
more diverse or dynamic banking system
and avoid the outcome where, you know,
Joe and I always like to throw up the
charts of how JP Morgan or Wells Fargo
came into being and it's just a story of
them snapping up lots and lots of
companies. Decades ago, there was a
Supreme Court case that was very preient
that warned that consolidation
in the banking system would ultimately
contribute to mass consolidation in the
real economy. And you're right, the
number of small community banks has
dwindled. And there's all sorts of
reasons for this, including changing
technology, consumer preferences so much
more. But I think one of the real big
reasons is that there is a perception
that the very largest banks as you
mentioned will be protected. When
Silicon Valley Bank was failing, where
was all the money flowing to?
>> They were taking their money out of
Silicon Valley Bank, Signature Bank and
others. It went to the very big guys
because every investor believes that
these banks are essentially always going
to be protected. They are able to raise
money with that implicit guarantee and
that means they are able to out compete
on so many dimensions
unfairly I think their smaller
counterparts. So I I really think we
need to be careful about giving benefits
and picking winners and losers and
that's what we have been doing is
essentially picking the very largest
banks as the winners and others as the
losers.
[Music]
We recently had the Robin Hood CEO on
the podcast. They're very excited about
tokenization of all kinds of things
including uh tokenization of stock for
that matter. And due to uh crypto
technology of some sorts, there's
enforcing borders in terms of defining
what a regulatory perimeter even is from
a geographical standpoint is really
hard. And due to smart contracts and
stable coins, etc., It's very plausible
that you could somewhere in the world,
maybe in an offshore or a lightly
regulated country, create some token
that tracks some regulated instrument
and it trades like a regulated
instrument up until maybe something goes
bust. Is there a danger that regulating
consumerf facing financial products that
law won't be able to keep up? that there
is this sort of like technological
explosion of things and that to some
extent because anyone who has access to
a stable coin wallet and access to the
internet could theoretically trade
anything anywhere that it would just be
a crisis from the regulatory perspective
and keeping a handle on everything
that's going on.
>> Well, I think we do have a jump ball
right now on the future of the dollar.
We do see the Trump administration very
interested I think in fundamentally
rethinking the role of the dollar in the
system. You raise this example of
technology but for years we have seen I
believe it's a $14 trillion market of
offshore dollars euro dollars which
poses very serious and significant
issues for the entire regulator. Now we
could have euro stocks like literally
not the Euro stocks index but something
that resembles in trading a US listed
regulated stock except it's on some
digital exchange. It's a decentralized
exchange but it moves in the same way
and how do you even like begin to wrap
your head around? I think the way in
which you want to is constantly
to figure out how do we solve real
problems in the economy
>> and how do you build for that rather
than allowing for products services to
create it purely based on arbitrage. I
also think we want to make sure that we
don't try and create something so
complex that it will always be
arbitrageed around and we need a lot
more simple bright lines that investors,
consumers, everyone can really easily
understand and easily follow.
Ultimately, the US is going to be the
place where people want to do business
because of strong rule of law and a good
legal system and all of those things.
And that's one of the most important
things to safeguard. Speaking of novel
businesses and I guess the idea of
policy kind of chasing after new tech,
I'm just going to go all Seinfeld on
this question and ask what's the deal
with buy now pay later because that is
everywhere nowadays and obviously
>> the question the wider question it poses
is whether or not consumers are just
taking on a load of credit in a new way
that possibly isn't accounted for very
well. Well, it's always interesting.
There's a table published by the Federal
Reserve about consumer credit
outstanding and it is always missing
many things including buy now pay later
which we have seen surge through the
pandemic growing more than 10x.
>> Wow.
>> It has really changed quite a bit. Tracy
by now pay later strangely was not
really homegrown in America. It came
from other jurisdictions. It was popular
in Sweden, Australia, and now it is a
major form of credit. Just so everyone
understands what it is,
>> you take out a loan, often pay in for.
It does not have an interest rate, but
the the buy now pay later lender takes a
cut from the merchant just like a credit
card company does. So you have seen a
lot of consumers believe that this is a
better way because it is no interest.
But the CFPB
did extensive study on it and found that
there's very significant issues when it
comes to people returning goods and not
necessarily getting it credited.
>> There's issues of people having multiple
buy now pay later loans across different
lenders and are levered up. I would hear
actually complaints from auto lenders
who would say to me, "How am I supposed
to write this auto loan if I don't know
what the buy now pay later loans are?"
Because they're not on the credit
report. Often
>> this this strikes me as super
interesting. I mean just like how
inadequate right now is our tracking
both in terms of the scale of it just
when we think about okay we want to have
aggregate sense of consumer consumer
indebtedness and then how how much of a
struggle is it for actual lenders to
judge the creditworthiness of consumers
because of the lack of visibility into
the
>> BNPL the faster it grows the more
difficult it will be and I think a key
piece of this is we are seeing all sorts
sorts of buy now pay later like products
go beyond the traditional lenders. We're
seeing banks and credit card companies
saying use my card and then go online
and you can convert it to buy now pay
later or some people thinking about how
to
>> connect it to community bank debit
cards. So I do believe it is a big blind
spot about consumer credit outstanding
right now. Obviously, it is a relatively
modest piece of the overall unsecured
debt, but if it continues its
trajectory, even if it slows its growth,
it will be a big piece of that pie.
>> I mean, presumably by now pay later
would fall or could fall under the remit
of the CFPB,
but
>> Well, it does.
>> It does, but I mean the CFPB is not
really functioning anymore. That seems
like an issue.
>> Well, what we are seeing is that the
protections that the CFPB tried to put
in place for buy now pay later
borrowers, some basic ones, and you can
get some statements that you're able to
return goods and get it credited.
>> It looks like a lot of that is just
being thrown in the trash or just not
enforced. We are seeing states all over
the country though looking to beef up
protections because they see how this
could create a treadmill of debt for
people. Just one more question from me.
So you were head of the CFPB under the
Biden administration and you were at the
FTC under the first Trump administration
and you got to experience some some of
the second Trump administration. What's
your sense of the difference between
Trump 1 and Trump 2.0 and how that
administration is operating and thinking
about things like regulation?
>> Yeah, I think that there is when it
comes to finance a real sense of
concern about how they want to think
about the dollar and how they want to
think of the future of Treasury
securities. I see Secretary Besson talk
very deliberately about wanting stable
coin, for example, to be a way to boost
demand for treasuries. Of course,
there's lots of issues with that,
>> but I think more broadly, the first
Trump administration was a lot less
organized
and now there is a clear clearly a plan
that they are executing on even if it
seems chaotic. So I think for those who
have concerns about it, I don't think
they should write it off as just chaos
or craziness. I think there is a lot of
things that are being done that will
have lasting effects on the financial
system.
>> All right, Roit Chopra, thank you so
much for coming on a thoughts. That was
so interesting and really good to get a
regulator's actual perspective. Thanks
for having me.
>> Thank you so much. That was great.
[Music]
Joe, that was really interesting and I'm
so glad we could have Roit on to give a
sort of fly onthe-wall perspective of a
regulator during, you know, what was a
pretty dramatic time.
>> There's so many interesting things
happening in FinReneg right now in
general. just obviously the sort of like
turning of the dial you know I think
like a really big picture story that
doesn't get a lot of attention because
we focus a lot on the changing
administrations because the financial
crisis was a really long time ago these
things always eb and flow right so you
have a crisis and everyone cracks down
and you sort of uh you know you do the
max and then memories fade you're like
why do we have the like this is I feel
like it's human nature as the 2009200
reforms go further into the past, we're
just going to have this sort of natural
loosening until the financial crisis of
2045 or whatever it is.
>> Well, I mean, why do we have the CFPB?
The whole answer is it was created after
the 2008 financial crisis. The other
thing I thought was really interesting
and this gets to the consolidation point
which I think is a massive massive story
in uh the US financial industry but it's
just that idea of okay if you're worried
about your deposit at a smaller bank the
natural thing is to move it into a too
big to fail bank because you know that
the US government based on precedent is
not going to let them go and so that
again seems to give the big banks a sort
of uh unnatural edge perhaps in terms of
deposit I mean, I we I know we talked
about this after SVB in multiple
episodes, but the sheer number of banks
in the United States that still exist
like boggles the mind, right? There is
no other country in the world that has
as many. Canada's like six banks. We're
so heavily banked in this country. It's
still today the random
>> There used to be a lot more. A lot more.
>> Yeah. But I mean it's staggering the
number of community banks and regional
banks that exist in the United States
even with all the consolidation.
>> Do you want to be like Canada, Joe?
That's the question.
>> No, I don't know. I I mean I I like
genuinely don't know like what the
optimal distribution is or anything, but
given the advantages that the big banks
have, the perception of safety, their
technological capabilities that they can
invest in that a community bank will
never be able to replicate, brand, etc.
the proliferation of banks is still like
a sort of interesting phenomenon of our
financial system.
>> The other thing that struck me from that
conversation was the buy now pay later
stuff which you know
>> we got to do more on that period.
>> Absolutely. It's becoming a really
interesting story but it just kind of
blows my mind that no one is actually
tracking that credit because the whole
thing is supposed to be
technologydriven. It's plugged in to the
checkout process of a website. It's
really easy to do. It seems insane to me
that like the credit bureaus can't track
it at the same time and it seems like a
huge huge data hole for the US economy.
>> That's a huge story. I completely agree.
And then uh you know we sort of talked
about at the end. I mean I think
>> it's such an interesting question the
degree to which if it happens we'll see
stable coins become part of the payments
landscape in a meaningful way rather
than just a way to get money onto
cryptocurrency trading websites which is
where they began. And then all of the
things around tokenization of equity. I
mean, it's just a fact that Robin Hood,
whose CEO we had on, unilaterally
announced that at some point there's
going to be some version of tokenized
equity or tokens that correspond to
equity in private companies, doing it
unilaterally. How regulators are going
to actually get their handle on this, I
have no idea.
>> Yeah. Tokens, tokens everywhere and not
a bank to lend. I think that was Roit's
point, right? All right. Shall we leave
it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest,
Roit Chopra. He's choprausa. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez, Carmen,
Dash Bennett at Dashbot, and Kellbrooks
at Kellbrooks. For more OddLots content,
go to bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we do autopsies of failed banks
with regulators, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Yeah.
[Music]
Heat.